#summary Frequently Asked Questions (niþara æsuu prazµa)
#labels Featured
<wiki:toc max_depth="1" />

= How do you type ඥ? =

The letter is not a letter from the Hodiya. Unicode Sinhala wrongly treats it as a hodi akura and that ruins the ability for you to text process Unicode Sinhala.


This letter is called <font face="suriyakumara">þaaluja sáyuga naasikyaya</font>.


That means it is a nasal (naasikyaya) that is generated with the dorsum of the tongue (þaaluja) and is a digraph (sáyuga). So, it is a combination of two letters: j+ç. Its history goes all the way back to Proto-Indo-European (Mother-of-all Indo-European languages). Sanskrit: <font face="suriyakumara">jçaana</font>-> English: knowledge.


Notice that even in English we have the digraph (kn), and it occurs as 'gn' in 'agnostic' and when we say ajçaaana, we pronounce it exactly the way the English word is pronounced (j goes to g).


= Why are my letters are not combined? =
== Mozilla Firefox ==

Firefox 3.0.3 does not form ligatures in fonts under 20 pixels. In Firefox you need to go to 
{{{
about:config
}}}
You can do this by typing *about:config* in the address bar and pressing Enter

Locate the following
{{{
set browser.display.auto_quality_min_font_size
}}}

Set the value to
{{{
0
}}}
Restart Firefox

= Why can't I type azookamaalaa (අශෝකමාලා)? =

Correct spelling: azokamaalaa (one o).

Please download the hodiyas from the Pihituvanna page (http://www.lovatasinhala.com/avazyabadu/SinhalaHoodiya.htm) when reading the following.

z and x are strictly Sanskrit letters. Sanskrit does NOT have long forms for e and o. In Sanskrit (single) e and o are always long vowels. Therefore we do not double up e or o.

So, Sanskrit orthography goes like this:

vizexa, zobana (Hint if any word has z or x it MUST be Sanskrit.)

Pali too does not have long e and o written forms. However, it has pronunciation rules, but are very much like (archaic) English. If the vowel is followed by two consonants, it is pronounced short otherwise, it is long.

The font tries to enforce orthography but it can do it only in cases where the spelling does not clash with Sinhala. Now, we know that only Sinhala has <font face="suriyakumara">æ</font> and <font face="suriyakumara">ææ</font>. And also we know that Sinhala does not have mahapraana. Therefore the font won't allow you to type khæ or khææ etc. Try it. I hope you know that SInhala or Pali do not have the two Sanskrit diphthongs: ai and au. (Check the hodiya). This is why it is wrong to type ðivaina. It is correctly ðivayina. Similarly, kavða not kauða.