#summary Ultimate Guide to Getting Started with Romanized Sinhala
#labels Phase-Support
<wiki:toc max_depth="2" />

= Introduction = 

This guide will help you: 
 * Setup Romanized Sinhala in your computer
 * Type English and Sinhala using a Word Processor
 * Send Emails in English and Sinhala
 * Browse web pages with Romanized Sinhala

= Requirements =
== Suriyakumara Font == 
Download the latest Smart Font for Sinhala:
[http://romanizedsinhala.googlecode.com/files/Suriyakumara.ttf Suriyakumara Font]

== Romanzed Sinhala Keyboard == 
Download the latest version of the keyboard for your operating system from:
http://code.google.com/p/romanizedsinhala/downloads/list 

 * For Windows XP, the file name will follow the pattern kbdssinh-*#.#*-xp.zip
  * e.g. http://romanizedsinhala.googlecode.com/files/kbdssinh-1.4-xp.zip
 * For Windows Vista, the file name will follow the pattern kbdssinh-*#.#*-vista.zip
  * e.g. http://romanizedsinhala.googlecode.com/files/kbdssinh-1.4-vista.zip

== WorldPad ==
Main artcile: http://www.sil.org/computing/catalog/show_software.asp?id=68

WorldPad is a basic text editor whose main distinction is the ability to display text in complex scripts using Graphite, a programmable rendering engine particularly suited to complex minority scripts. WorldPad can also be used to work with text in a simple "Roman" scripts. Some of WorldPad's text-editing features include multilingual text processing, named styles, right-to-left paragraph orientation, and mixed direction text flow handling, The installation program here includes the WorldPad program, the Graphite engine and font compiler, and a few sample Graphite fonts.

[http://scripts.sil.org/cms/scripts/render_download.php?site_id=nrsi&format=file&media_id=WorldPad_2_8_setup&filename=WorldPad_2_8_setup.msi WorldPad 2.8]

== Thunderbird ==
[http://ftp.mozilla.org/pub/mozilla.org/thunderbird/nightly/latest-trunk/ Mozilla Thunderbird 3.0 Beta]

== Browser == 
[http://www.firefox.com/ Mozilla Firefox 3.0] or above

= Installation = 
 * Install the Suriyakumara. This can be done by right clicking the font and clicking Install. You can also drag the font to Windows\Fonts folder. 
 * Install the correct keyboard for your system. The Romanized Keyboard will show up under *Serbian (Latin)* in Windows XP, and *Sinhala (Sri Lanka)* in Windows Vista. 
 * Install WorldPad, Thunderbird and Firefox

= Configuration =

== Keyboard == 
After the installation of the Keyboard, the new keyboard should be visible in the Language Bar automatically. If for some reason, the new keyboard is not displayed, you can set up the keyboard manually. 

 * Setup keyboard shortcuts so that you can switch between languages quite easiliy: http://code.google.com/p/romanizedsinhala/wiki/LanguageBar

== Word Processor ==
 * Setup WorldPad according to the video: http://romanizedsinhala.googlecode.com/files/WorldPad%20Sinhala.avi
  * For Windows XP, the Language ID would be Serbian (Latin). 
  * For Windows Vista, the Language ID would be Sinhalese as seen in the video. 

== Email Client ==
 * By default your emails are saved in %appdata%\Thunderbird\Profiles. You can relocate this to a folder in your Documents by modifying the profiles.ini file. 

 * Change the IsRelative value to 0 and customize the Path:

{{{
[General]
StartWithLastProfile=1

[Profile0]
Name=default
IsRelative=0
Path=H:\Users\Mike\Documents\Applications\Thunderbird\2008
}}}

 * Upon the next launch of Thunderbird, the profile should be created inside your Documents folder. 

== Browser == 

Firefox by default does not allow formation of ligatures for size under 20px. You will need to follow http://code.google.com/p/romanizedsinhala/wiki/FAQ#Why_are_my_letters_are_not_combined? in order to display the Sinhala letters properly

= Usage = 

== Word Processor == 
WorldPad can be used for typing any offline document that contains mixture of English and Sinhala. The writing system can be switched by a drop down menu. WorldPad automatically changes to the correct font and keyboard.



